README.md, before:

# Migasfree Swarm

This project runs the Migasfree Server Suite 5 on [Docker Swarm](https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/).

## Project Directory Structure

* `build`: Source code for the Docker images.
* `doc`: Documentation.
* `images`: Directory containing pre-built Docker images.
* `migration`: Migration script from version 4.
* `test`: Testing scripts.

## Testing Environment Architecture

![cluster-testing](doc/cluster-testing.png)

* The environment variable `DATASHARE_FS` should be set to `local`.

* All data is stored in `local volumes` on `node 1`.

* In this context, `datashare` refers to the volume named `migasfree-swarm`.

## Production Environment Architecture

![cluster-production](doc/cluster-production.png)

* The Swarm cluster handles both **port 80** and **port 443**; however, only port 443 is shown in the diagram for clarity.

* The environment variable `DATASHARE_FS` should be set to `nfs`.

* Data is stored on an `external NFS volume` outside the Swarm cluster, except for the `database volume` ([PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)) and the `datastore volume` ([Redis](https://redis.io/)), which are kept local for better performance.

* In this context, `datashare` refers to the volume named `migasfree-swarm`, which is available on all nodes in the cluster.

* `Multiple network interfaces`: If the node has more than one interface, you must specify the `advertise-addr`, which is the IP address of the network interface connected to the cluster network.

## Requirements

#### 1. FQDN & DNS

* Choose a suitable `FQDN` for your Migasfree server, e.g., `migasfree.mydomain.com`.

  The `FQDN` and the following `subdomains` must resolve to the server's IP. Configure them in your `Domain Name Service (DNS)`.

* For `testing purposes` only, you can add the domain names to your `desktop machine` to access Migasfree services by editing the `/etc/hosts` file:

  ```/etc/hosts
  <IP> <FQDN>
  <IP> portainer-<FQDN>
  <IP> datastore-<FQDN>
  <IP> database-<FQDN>
  <IP> datashare-<FQDN>
  <IP> worker-<FQDN>
  <IP> assistant-<FQDN>
  ```

  Example:

  ```/etc/hosts
  # For FQDN=migasfree.acme.com
  # ===========================
  172.0.0.10 migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 portainer-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 database-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 datashare-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 datastore-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 worker-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 assistant-migasfree.acme.com
  ```

#### 2. NFS

* In a `Production Environment`, an `NFS server` is required so each Swarm cluster node has access to the data. Refer to [NFS install](doc/nfs.md)

  * Disk SPACE VOLUME >= 1TB

  During deployment, set `DATASHARE_FS` to `nfs`

  ```txt
  DATASHARE_FS (local | nfs): nfs
  ```

* In a `Testing Environment` you can use a `local` volume on the swarm manager node where the stack is deployed.

  During deployment, set `DATASHARE_FS` to `local`

  ```txt
  DATASHARE_FS (local | nfs): local
  ```

  In this `local mode`, data will only be accessible on the manager node where the deployment takes place, used for testing on a `single-node` Swarm cluster.

#### 3. Swarm node hardware

* RAM >= 16 GB
* CPU >= 4
* Disk SPACE SYSTEM >= 80 GB
* DockerRootDir = /var/lib/docker (default directory)

#### 4. Swarm node software

* [Install docker engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install) on each Swarm node.

## Deployment

* On the host that will act as the `Swarm manager`, create an empty directory and run:

  ```bash
  # Example of creating an empty directory
  #     mkdir /data/cluster
  #     cd /data/cluster

  docker run --detach=false --rm -ti -v $(pwd):/stack -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock  migasfree/swarm:5.0-beta13 config
  ```


* Initial configuration:
  ```txt
  (for nfs)

  DATASHARE_FS (local | nfs): nfs
  DATASHARE_SERVER (x.x.x.x): 172.0.0.20
  DATASHARE_PATH (/exports/migasfree-swarm):
  ```

  ```txt
  (for local)

  DATASHARE_FS (local | nfs): local
  ```

 * Two files will be created in the directory: `env.py` and `migasfree-swarm`.

  * Check the contents of `env.py`

    ```bash
    cat env.py
    ```
    Example output:

    ```txt
    DATASHARE_FS='nfs'
    DATASHARE_SERVER='172.0.0.20'
    DATASHARE_PATH='/exports/migasfree-swarm'
    DATASHARE_PORT='2049'
    ```

## Downloading images

* Download the images we will need at this time..

  ```
  ./migasfree-swarm pull
  ```

## Deploying the Stack

  * Deploy the `Migasfree stack` by running:

    ```bash
    ./migasfree-swarm deploy
    ```

    During deployment:
    ```txt
    STACK (): inv
    FQDN (migasfree.acme.com): inv.org

    Warning! This system is not a Swarm node.
    Do you want to create a manager node? (Y/n):y

    ```

  * You can monitor the services by visiting  `https://<FQDN>/services/status`.

## Undeploying the Stack

* To `undeploy` the `Migasfree stack`, run:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm undeploy
  ```

  You can redeploy it with:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm deploy
  ```

## Logins

  * To access the `administration consoles`, visit `https://<FQDN>/services/status`. View the credentials by running:

    ```bash
    ./migasfree-swarm secret
    ```

    Example credentials:

    ```txt
    proxy & portainer:

        ryuPnPkU:rPi3iHdjBUoE0RudZZo6R53tPDifRD

    Stack inv:

        admin:ajwtcC788fkipE5nh2ZU0Hcmlrj4tR

    ```

    The format is `username:password`.

    ![consoles](doc/consoles.png)

    More information about the [consoles](doc/consoles.md)

## Production Consoles

* To disable consoles that are unnecessary in production:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm consoles-pro
  ```

  This disables the database, datastore, and worker consoles.

## Development Consoles

* Enable all development consoles:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm consoles-dev
  ```

## Data Persistence

* In Docker, volumes provide data persistence by allowing data generated and used by containers to be stored outside the container's lifecycle. Even if a container is deleted or recreated, volumes persist on the host’s filesystem, ensuring that data is not lost. This allows containers to securely and efficiently access shared or persistent data, such as databases or configuration files, beyond the container's lifespan.

  1. Migasfree Swarm uses two **local volumes** for storage:

     * `database` volume: Stores the PostgreSQL database.

     * `datastore` volume: Stores the Redis database.

     You can specify on which node of the Swarm cluster these volumes should reside by using **labels on the nodes**. The labels are:

     * for the PostgreSQL volume.

       ```txt
       database=true
       ```

     * for the Redis volume.

       ```txt
       datastore=true
       ```

     Only **one instance** of each of these volumes can exist in the cluster at a time.

  2. There is also a third volume called `migasfree-swarm`, which is used to store various types of information, including certificate files, Portainer data, credentials, and additional data like repositories and software packages managed by Migasfree.

     The `migasfree-swarm` volume can be configured in two ways:

     * Local: Used for **testing** or when the Swarm cluster has only **a single node**. Configure this by setting the environment variable:

       ```
       DATASHARE_FS=local
       ```

     * NFS (Network File System): Used for multi-node setups. Data is stored on an NFS server, and **each node in the cluster** has an **volume of type NFS** pointing to the NFS server. Configure this by setting the environment variable:

       ```
       DATASHARE_FS=nfs
       ```

  An example of what it would look like when listing volumes with Docker, when `STACK=inv`, would be:

  ```txt
  # docker volume ls
  DRIVER    VOLUME NAME
  local     inv_database
  local     inv_datastore
  local     migasfree-swarm
  ```

## Certificates

There are three methods available to configure the server certificates:

  * Self-Signed
  * Manual Replacement
  * Automatic Certificate Management


### Self-Signed

When the Migasfree cluster is started for the first time, a self-signed certificate is automatically generated and saved at `/var/lib/docker/volumes/migasfree-swarm/_data/certificates/<STACK>.pem`.

This allows you to quickly begin using Migasfree without additional setup.

### Manual Replacement

If you have a certificate issued by a trusted certificate authority, replace the auto-generated certificate with your own. The certificate must be valid for the following domain names:


* `<FQDN>`
* `portainer-<FQDN>`
* `datastore-<FQDN>`
* `database-<FQDN>`
* `datashare-<FQDN>`
* `worker-<FQDN>`
* `assistant-<FQDN>`


For example, if you have obtained a wildcard certificate with a Subject Alternative Name (SAN) of the form `*.<FQDN>` using a DNS-01 challenge, replace the existing `<STACK>.pem` file with the new certificate and the `<STACK>.pem.key` file with the associated private key. Then, reconfigure the proxy as follows:

```bash
    # SAMPLE
    # ======
    STACK=mystack

    # copy certificate
    cp mycertificate.cer /var/lib/docker/volumes/migasfree-swarm/_data/certificates/${STACK}.pem

    # copy key
    cp mykey.key /var/lib/docker/volumes/migasfree-swarm/_data/certificates/${STACK}.pem.key

    # reconfigure proxy
    docker exec $(docker ps | grep proxy_proxy | awk '{print $1}') reconfigure
```

### Automatic Certificate Management

The recommended approach is to configure the STACK to automatically obtain certificates from LetsEncrypt using the ACME protocol with the HTTP-01 challenge. This eliminates the need for manual certificate management. Note that the cluster must be accessible from the internet for Let's Encrypt to verify and issue the certificate.

Steps to enable automatic certificate management:

  1. Open the `datashare console` and set the `HTTPSMODE` variable to `'auto'` in the `env.py` file.

  2. Redeploy the stack with the following commands:
     ```bash
     ./migasfree-swarm undeploy
     ./migasfree-swarm deploy
     ```

## CA Root Certificate

In many organizations, internet access requires installing a root certificate issued by the organization's own certificate authority. This root certificate is typically used in firewalls to inspect and control internet traffic securely.

To configure this, follow these steps:

  1. Open the `datashare console`

  2. Navigate to the `ca-certificates` folder and copy the root certificate issued by your organization's certificate authority.

  3. Redeploy the stack with the following commands:
     ```bash
     ./migasfree-swarm undeploy
     ./migasfree-swarm deploy
     ```

## Backups

Both PostgreSQL and Redis databases are automatically and periodically backed up as a dump in the volume named `migasfree-swarm`.

These database dumps can be found at `https://datashare.<FQDN>/files/dump/`. The file `migasfree.sql` corresponds to PostgreSQL, and `dump.rdb` to Redis.

The `BACKUP_CRON` variable in the `env.py` file of the stack defines the frequency of this dump process.

Therefore, backing up the `migasfree-swarm` volume will safeguard all data, including the databases. It is **your responsibility** to ensure that a backup of your entire Migasfree cluster is performed on storage that is independent of both the cluster nodes and the NFS server.

- If `DATASHARE_FS=nfs`, you must copy the exported folder from the NFS server.
- If `DATASHARE_FS=local`, copy the folder `/var/lib/docker/volumes/migasfree-swarm/_data`.

## Disaster Recovery

Having regular and consistent backups is essential for disaster recovery. In the event of catastrophic data loss, these backups can be used to restore your Docker volumes and recover your data. Always ensure you have a clear and tested recovery plan in place.

You can restore the database and datastore volumes as follows (ensure the dump files you want to recover are available at `https://datashare.<FQDN>/files/dump/`):

1. Undeploy the stack:
    ```bash
    ./migasfree-swarm undeploy
    ```

2. Remove the database and datastore volumes:
    ```bash
    docker volume rm <STACK>_database <STACK>_datastore
    ```

3. Redeploy the stack (this will create empty databases):
    ```bash
    ./migasfree-swarm deploy
    ```

4. From Portainer, access the shell of both the `database` and `datastore` containers, and execute the following command in each:
    ```bash
    restore
    ```
    ![exec_container](doc/exec_container.png)

## Installing and Synchronizing with Migasfree Client 5

* If you are testing Migasfree, go to `https://<FQDN>/pool/install/` and check the migasfree-client.txt file to manually install a client. However, this is not the recommended method for installation. Ideally, the client configuration should be packaged for proper deployment.

## Adding Worker Nodes to a Swarm Cluster

* Adding worker nodes increases the cluster's capacity. When you deploy a service in a swarm, the Docker engine automatically schedules tasks on all available nodes, whether they are worker or manager nodes.

* To add a worker node to the cluster, execute the following command on the `manager` node:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm join-worker
  ```

  This command will provide the instructions you need to execute on the new node.


## Leaving the Swarm

* To leave the Swarm cluster without deleting volumes:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm leave
  ```

## Deleting volumes

* If you are testing Migasfree and no longer need the data on your Migasfree server, you can list and delete the volumes on a specific node by running the following commands:

    To list volumes:

    ```bash
    docker volume ls
    ```

    To remove a volume:

    ```
    docker volume rm <volume>
    ```


## Building images

* To build the Docker images:

  ```bash
  cd build
  bash build.sh
  ```

## TODO

Refer to the [todo list](doc/todo.md)

Commit message:

add requirement for vm.overcommit_memory=1 on node

README.md, after:

# Migasfree Swarm

This project runs the Migasfree Server Suite 5 on [Docker Swarm](https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/).

## Project Directory Structure

* `build`: Source code for the Docker images.
* `doc`: Documentation.
* `images`: Directory containing pre-built Docker images.
* `migration`: Migration script from version 4.
* `test`: Testing scripts.

## Testing Environment Architecture

![cluster-testing](doc/cluster-testing.png)

* The environment variable `DATASHARE_FS` should be set to `local`.

* All data is stored in `local volumes` on `node 1`.

* In this context, `datashare` refers to the volume named `migasfree-swarm`.

## Production Environment Architecture

![cluster-production](doc/cluster-production.png)

* The Swarm cluster handles both **port 80** and **port 443**; however, only port 443 is shown in the diagram for clarity.

* The environment variable `DATASHARE_FS` should be set to `nfs`.

* Data is stored on an `external NFS volume` outside the Swarm cluster, except for the `database volume` ([PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)) and the `datastore volume` ([Redis](https://redis.io/)), which are kept local for better performance.

* In this context, `datashare` refers to the volume named `migasfree-swarm`, which is available on all nodes in the cluster.

* `Multiple network interfaces`: If the node has more than one interface, you must specify the `advertise-addr`, which is the IP address of the network interface connected to the cluster network.

## Requirements

#### 1. FQDN & DNS

* Choose a suitable `FQDN` for your Migasfree server, e.g., `migasfree.mydomain.com`.

  The `FQDN` and the following `subdomains` must resolve to the server's IP. Configure them in your `Domain Name Service (DNS)`.

* For `testing purposes` only, you can add the domain names to your `desktop machine` to access Migasfree services by editing the `/etc/hosts` file:

  ```/etc/hosts
  <IP> <FQDN>
  <IP> portainer-<FQDN>
  <IP> datastore-<FQDN>
  <IP> database-<FQDN>
  <IP> datashare-<FQDN>
  <IP> worker-<FQDN>
  <IP> assistant-<FQDN>
  ```

  Example:

  ```/etc/hosts
  # For FQDN=migasfree.acme.com
  # ===========================
  172.0.0.10 migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 portainer-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 database-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 datashare-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 datastore-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 worker-migasfree.acme.com
  172.0.0.10 assistant-migasfree.acme.com
  ```

#### 2. NFS

* In a `Production Environment`, an `NFS server` is required so each Swarm cluster node has access to the data. Refer to [NFS install](doc/nfs.md)

  * Disk SPACE VOLUME >= 1TB

  During deployment, set `DATASHARE_FS` to `nfs`

  ```txt
  DATASHARE_FS (local | nfs): nfs
  ```

* In a `Testing Environment` you can use a `local` volume on the swarm manager node where the stack is deployed.

  During deployment, set `DATASHARE_FS` to `local`

  ```txt
  DATASHARE_FS (local | nfs): local
  ```

  In this `local mode`, data will only be accessible on the manager node where the deployment takes place, used for testing on a `single-node` Swarm cluster.

#### 3. Swarm node hardware

* RAM >= 16 GB
* CPU >= 4
* Disk SPACE SYSTEM >= 80 GB
* DockerRootDir = /var/lib/docker (default directory)

#### 4. Swarm node software

* [Install docker engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install) on each Swarm node.

#### 5. Datastore Node Configuration Requirement (Redis)

  * To ensure proper operation and avoid potential
    failures during background save (RDB snapshots) or replication, the Linux kernel parameter vm.overcommit_memory must be set to 1 on the node where the Redis (datastore) is running.

    This setting allows the kernel to permit memory overcommitment, which is critical for Redis because it relies on the ability to fork child processes that temporarily require more memory than the system may physically have available.

    To make this setting persistent across reboots, add the following line to `/etc/sysctl.conf`:

    ```text
    vm.overcommit_memory=1
    ```

    And reboot the node.


## Deployment

* On the host that will act as the `Swarm manager`, create an empty directory and run:

  ```bash
  # Example of creating an empty directory
  #     mkdir /data/cluster
  #     cd /data/cluster

  docker run --detach=false --rm -ti -v $(pwd):/stack -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock  migasfree/swarm:5.0-beta13 config
  ```


* Initial configuration:
  ```txt
  (for nfs)

  DATASHARE_FS (local | nfs): nfs
  DATASHARE_SERVER (x.x.x.x): 172.0.0.20
  DATASHARE_PATH (/exports/migasfree-swarm):
  ```

  ```txt
  (for local)

  DATASHARE_FS (local | nfs): local
  ```

 * Two files will be created in the directory: `env.py` and `migasfree-swarm`.

  * Check the contents of `env.py`

    ```bash
    cat env.py
    ```
    Example output:

    ```txt
    DATASHARE_FS='nfs'
    DATASHARE_SERVER='172.0.0.20'
    DATASHARE_PATH='/exports/migasfree-swarm'
    DATASHARE_PORT='2049'
    ```

## Downloading images

* Download the images we will need at this time..

  ```
  ./migasfree-swarm pull
  ```

## Deploying the Stack

  * Deploy the `Migasfree stack` by running:

    ```bash
    ./migasfree-swarm deploy
    ```

    During deployment:
    ```txt
    STACK (): inv
    FQDN (migasfree.acme.com): inv.org

    Warning! This system is not a Swarm node.
    Do you want to create a manager node? (Y/n):y

    ```

  * You can monitor the services by visiting  `https://<FQDN>/services/status`.

## Undeploying the Stack

* To `undeploy` the `Migasfree stack`, run:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm undeploy
  ```

  You can redeploy it with:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm deploy
  ```

## Logins

  * To access the `administration consoles`, visit `https://<FQDN>/services/status`. View the credentials by running:

    ```bash
    ./migasfree-swarm secret
    ```

    Example credentials:

    ```txt
    proxy & portainer:

        ryuPnPkU:rPi3iHdjBUoE0RudZZo6R53tPDifRD

    Stack inv:

        admin:ajwtcC788fkipE5nh2ZU0Hcmlrj4tR

    ```

    The format is `username:password`.

    ![consoles](doc/consoles.png)

    More information about the [consoles](doc/consoles.md)

## Production Consoles

* To disable consoles that are unnecessary in production:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm consoles-pro
  ```

  This disables the database, datastore, and worker consoles.

## Development Consoles

* Enable all development consoles:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm consoles-dev
  ```

## Data Persistence

* In Docker, volumes provide data persistence by allowing data generated and used by containers to be stored outside the container's lifecycle. Even if a container is deleted or recreated, volumes persist on the host’s filesystem, ensuring that data is not lost. This allows containers to securely and efficiently access shared or persistent data, such as databases or configuration files, beyond the container's lifespan.

  1. Migasfree Swarm uses two **local volumes** for storage:

     * `database` volume: Stores the PostgreSQL database.

     * `datastore` volume: Stores the Redis database.

     You can specify on which node of the Swarm cluster these volumes should reside by using **labels on the nodes**. The labels are:

     * for the PostgreSQL volume.

       ```txt
       database=true
       ```

     * for the Redis volume.

       ```txt
       datastore=true
       ```

     Only **one instance** of each of these volumes can exist in the cluster at a time.

  2. There is also a third volume called `migasfree-swarm`, which is used to store various types of information, including certificate files, Portainer data, credentials, and additional data like repositories and software packages managed by Migasfree.

     The `migasfree-swarm` volume can be configured in two ways:

     * Local: Used for **testing** or when the Swarm cluster has only **a single node**. Configure this by setting the environment variable:

       ```
       DATASHARE_FS=local
       ```

     * NFS (Network File System): Used for multi-node setups. Data is stored on an NFS server, and **each node in the cluster** has an **volume of type NFS** pointing to the NFS server. Configure this by setting the environment variable:

       ```
       DATASHARE_FS=nfs
       ```

  An example of what it would look like when listing volumes with Docker, when `STACK=inv`, would be:

  ```txt
  # docker volume ls
  DRIVER    VOLUME NAME
  local     inv_database
  local     inv_datastore
  local     migasfree-swarm
  ```

## Certificates

There are three methods available to configure the server certificates:

  * Self-Signed
  * Manual Replacement
  * Automatic Certificate Management


### Self-Signed

When the Migasfree cluster is started for the first time, a self-signed certificate is automatically generated and saved at `/var/lib/docker/volumes/migasfree-swarm/_data/certificates/<STACK>.pem`.

This allows you to quickly begin using Migasfree without additional setup.

### Manual Replacement

If you have a certificate issued by a trusted certificate authority, replace the auto-generated certificate with your own. The certificate must be valid for the following domain names:


* `<FQDN>`
* `portainer-<FQDN>`
* `datastore-<FQDN>`
* `database-<FQDN>`
* `datashare-<FQDN>`
* `worker-<FQDN>`
* `assistant-<FQDN>`


For example, if you have obtained a wildcard certificate with a Subject Alternative Name (SAN) of the form `*.<FQDN>` using a DNS-01 challenge, replace the existing `<STACK>.pem` file with the new certificate and the `<STACK>.pem.key` file with the associated private key. Then, reconfigure the proxy as follows:

```bash
    # SAMPLE
    # ======
    STACK=mystack

    # copy certificate
    cp mycertificate.cer /var/lib/docker/volumes/migasfree-swarm/_data/certificates/${STACK}.pem

    # copy key
    cp mykey.key /var/lib/docker/volumes/migasfree-swarm/_data/certificates/${STACK}.pem.key

    # reconfigure proxy
    docker exec $(docker ps | grep proxy_proxy | awk '{print $1}') reconfigure
```

### Automatic Certificate Management

The recommended approach is to configure the STACK to automatically obtain certificates from LetsEncrypt using the ACME protocol with the HTTP-01 challenge. This eliminates the need for manual certificate management. Note that the cluster must be accessible from the internet for Let's Encrypt to verify and issue the certificate.

Steps to enable automatic certificate management:

  1. Open the `datashare console` and set the `HTTPSMODE` variable to `'auto'` in the `env.py` file.

  2. Redeploy the stack with the following commands:
     ```bash
     ./migasfree-swarm undeploy
     ./migasfree-swarm deploy
     ```

## CA Root Certificate

In many organizations, internet access requires installing a root certificate issued by the organization's own certificate authority. This root certificate is typically used in firewalls to inspect and control internet traffic securely.

To configure this, follow these steps:

  1. Open the `datashare console`

  2. Navigate to the `ca-certificates` folder and copy the root certificate issued by your organization's certificate authority.

  3. Redeploy the stack with the following commands:
     ```bash
     ./migasfree-swarm undeploy
     ./migasfree-swarm deploy
     ```

## Backups

Both PostgreSQL and Redis databases are automatically and periodically backed up as a dump in the volume named `migasfree-swarm`.

These database dumps can be found at `https://datashare.<FQDN>/files/dump/`. The file `migasfree.sql` corresponds to PostgreSQL, and `dump.rdb` to Redis.

The `BACKUP_CRON` variable in the `env.py` file of the stack defines the frequency of this dump process.

Therefore, backing up the `migasfree-swarm` volume will safeguard all data, including the databases. It is **your responsibility** to ensure that a backup of your entire Migasfree cluster is performed on storage that is independent of both the cluster nodes and the NFS server.

- If `DATASHARE_FS=nfs`, you must copy the exported folder from the NFS server.
- If `DATASHARE_FS=local`, copy the folder `/var/lib/docker/volumes/migasfree-swarm/_data`.

## Disaster Recovery

Having regular and consistent backups is essential for disaster recovery. In the event of catastrophic data loss, these backups can be used to restore your Docker volumes and recover your data. Always ensure you have a clear and tested recovery plan in place.

You can restore the database and datastore volumes as follows (ensure the dump files you want to recover are available at `https://datashare.<FQDN>/files/dump/`):

1. Undeploy the stack:
    ```bash
    ./migasfree-swarm undeploy
    ```

2. Remove the database and datastore volumes:
    ```bash
    docker volume rm <STACK>_database <STACK>_datastore
    ```

3. Redeploy the stack (this will create empty databases):
    ```bash
    ./migasfree-swarm deploy
    ```

4. From Portainer, access the shell of both the `database` and `datastore` containers, and execute the following command in each:
    ```bash
    restore
    ```
    ![exec_container](doc/exec_container.png)

## Installing and Synchronizing with Migasfree Client 5

* If you are testing Migasfree, go to `https://<FQDN>/pool/install/` and check the migasfree-client.txt file to manually install a client. However, this is not the recommended method for installation. Ideally, the client configuration should be packaged for proper deployment.

## Adding Worker Nodes to a Swarm Cluster

* Adding worker nodes increases the cluster's capacity. When you deploy a service in a swarm, the Docker engine automatically schedules tasks on all available nodes, whether they are worker or manager nodes.

* To add a worker node to the cluster, execute the following command on the `manager` node:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm join-worker
  ```

  This command will provide the instructions you need to execute on the new node.


## Leaving the Swarm

* To leave the Swarm cluster without deleting volumes:

  ```bash
  ./migasfree-swarm leave
  ```

## Deleting volumes

* If you are testing Migasfree and no longer need the data on your Migasfree server, you can list and delete the volumes on a specific node by running the following commands:

    To list volumes:

    ```bash
    docker volume ls
    ```

    To remove a volume:

    ```
    docker volume rm <volume>
    ```


## Building images

* To build the Docker images:

  ```bash
  cd build
  bash build.sh
  ```

## TODO

Refer to the [todo list](doc/todo.md)
